[Music]
episode
uh the mh podcast mohammed hijab
podcast today we're joined with none
other than abu taymiyah
or abu taymiyah someone who's been
spending how many years it now in
medina in the last four years yeah last
four years madina masha'allah doing
islamic studies
and he has got many duros and uh online
many of the
uh halaqat lectures online
and today we want to get into some
controversial questions as we do in this
very controversial podcast uh with uh
mia but before we do so um i wanted to
ask
uh just a general question maybe
starting off
about your experiences in medina and um
i mean how have you found the journey of
seeking knowledge
and what advice would you give to
someone generally about seeking
knowledge
is
um we have to understand that seeking
knowledge is not like
studying physics okay
or like accounting science whatever it
might be that we study in the
universities right
engineering these studies
this is your path to allah subhanahu wa
okay
from the cradle to the grave right so
it's not just like a profession
that we spend a couple of years with but
rather
it's a journey the moment you go with it
it's going to follow you follow you up
all the way up to your grave right
and this is why even some of the
scholars subhanallah before they passed
away
they would be carrying like papers of
the hadith
that they were written that they were
writing down
and uh and some of them like even on
their deathbed
a hadith would come to their minds and
they would want to write it down you see
so it's something that continues from
the moment
that you start that journey all the way
up to your death
and it requires a lot of patience it
really really does
okay i know it's a wonderful thing to be
known as the day
to be giving down to the people and it
comes with a lot of rewards as well
as the messenger sallallahu alaihi with
some said men died
canada
okay whoever calls the guidance for him
is the reward of everyone that follows
him up on that guidance
and he won't take anything away from him
and then look what he also said
women died in the
guidance for him is the sin of everyone
that followed him up on that misguidance
okay so it can work both ways
you can maybe even call it a
double-edged sword right so he requires
time it requires patience
we shouldn't try to be kind of like
hasty and wanting to be out
i remember also the shaykh of
he would say if i had the ability to
take the knowledge
and to pour it into your mouth the same
way
water and milk would be poured uh in
your throats
then i would have done that but the only
way you're going to attain knowledge is
by the scraping of the knees and the
scraping of
your toes right scraping of the knee is
the scraping of the toes and the
scraping of the elbows
so it takes time you know it takes a lot
of effort i remember when he was in
damage
the four years that i spent in yemen
before that it wasn't easy
i remember subhanallah we would only get
water once every two days
and sometimes the water wouldn't come
through our taps like for days on end
electricity would come for a couple of
hours every two to three days
and sometimes it wouldn't even happen
okay
and we would have to like go out and you
know take the water and
just so we can fill up our bucket so uh
mentioned you're not gonna attain
knowledge of just the relaxation of the
body it requires effort
it requires you know time it also
reminds me of something that imam shafi
rahim allah
in mentions to how much effort you put
in okay
this is how you're going to attain
loftiness
and whoever doesn't put that effort in
he's going to be wasting his time he's
going to be chasing the impossible
okay you want to become honored you want
a high position
why do you sleep at night and then he
gives the example of somebody who's
ready to risk his life
he dives into the sea to get the pearls
from under the sea right
what kind of risk would we be willing to
take to do something like that
so uh it's my yemen like
i remember when i first got to medina uh
a brother called sheikh abdul razakh who
i benefited from
in the hambury he took me into the dorms
and he said to me about him you're going
to struggle with these dorms
huh and i said to him we got running
water
we got running electricity we didn't
even have that here man
okay so sometimes you know going out
being in places like egypt mauritania
but yemen obviously now there's a lot of
issues in yemen
you're gonna have to put a lot of effort
in okay
and that which we come out with is
absolutely nothing
to uh what the self came out with
having gone through all of the
difficulties but anyways this is a
i don't want to prolong it but i've got
a video on my youtube channel it's
called he drank his urine
six times this was the case of some of
the people of the past they would drink
their urine because they would
out of what you call it uh necessity
because they're walking in the desert
they don't have no water they don't have
anything
so that's that's very subhanallah
motivating i think a lot of people will
take a lot of benefit in gems from that
especially those who live in you know
modern day
societies where everything is fast
everything is quick everything is
accessible
um and so for that that's very
insightful i want to move on to now is
perhaps on a lot of people's mind in
many ways
could be since the elephant in the room
which is
there's a lot of kind of um refutations
you want to call it that you're involved
in or that you are associated with
maybe not directly involved in yourself
um
some time ago you came speaks corner
there was some kind of drama between you
and
oshid and um it was surrounding the case
of
haddad and a particular video
that came out basically the shiite he
went to a
that that man put out which is that he
went to a place where he was discussing
with the shia and stuff like that and
then
you know from that there was all kinds
of conclusions that were made on his
character
do i just want to ask you a direct
question do were you involved in that
were you part of the
um the backing that dalman had for that
video do you agree with that do you
endorse that
do you think that that was something
which is uh fair
that was said about or do you think that
that's something that maybe shouldn't
have been done
so there's a number of things that we
can actually mention with regards to
that right
um because you asked a couple of
questions as well
did they or did he have the backing of
myself before he made the video
okay or was it just after and so on and
so forth right
um firstly um
i personally didn't know about the video
till after it came up
i was hearing about a video that's going
to be released
okay did i know about it beforehand and
that is
that's not correct and i know now
obviously um
because of a video that went out between
him and sajid i didn't even know they
were making that video
but it comes across there that the team
was this
was it was consulted and um
and also my name was mentioned uh in
good light by both of the brothers
so one could easily think that i kind of
authorized it
which i didn't okay um
but there is mistakes that i did and i'm
not just gonna like throw somebody under
the bus and kind of free myself and just
you know run away from the situation
uh there is mistakes that i did
that i really really really regret and i
began to think more about it
when i got to medina because when there
is
um a lot of battles taking place and
you're on the ground
it's like a war zone right and sometimes
it doesn't really allow you to
just think outside of the box but when
you kind of like
just step out it allows you to look at
things in a better perspective
okay so um and of course that incident
with adnan oshida happened just before
i went to medina like i wasn't planning
to go to hyde park
me my cousin siraj i think you know him
right
we happen to be eating in edgeway road i
was you know going to be leaving very
soon so i want to spend my
some good time with one of my favorite
cousins right
so um he follows uh alidah on snapchat
so he saw adidas he goes oh let's just
go and i've never been there before i've
never ever been there before
so we're going to come on to that later
anyways inshaallah to add exactly what
happened
okay just reminded me just in case i
forget
so when i got to medina um
i just really just started thinking
about this issue more some brothers
did come up to me in a very nice way and
they said you know
i just want you to you know maybe just
think about everything that you did
you know was a good thing was it not so
that got my thinking
going you know uh until one day i think
this was like two three weeks in
my brother called uma is the son of law
the son-in-law of
dr haytham right came up to me
i was saying in the haram i was reading
a hadith
and and i didn't know who he was i
didn't know who he was
and uh and uh he basically pointed out
that incident right and and he mentioned
the other incident as well about the
student loans that when we went to
kuwait so
we had discussions on a number of things
and there's no need for me to mention
now because and my journey is
but i'm going to mention this issue this
one issue
the moment he brought up dr hayton i
said to him look
we
when they asked him that uh to put down
the prices after everything started
becoming inflated right
so he said this to him i want to meet
allah azzawajal
this is what the mistletoe i'm saying
right and none of you guys
are asking me as none of you guys are
making a complaint
against me with regards to blood money
with regards to the wealth of the people
and so on and so forth
the people's honors come under this as
well right
and uh and ever since then
i just started thinking about i promised
him that i'm going to look into the
issue
this is right at the beginning exactly
like four years ago
that i'm going to look into it i'm going
to research the issue
and uh and to be very honest with you i
kind of just got very occupied
and but the thing just started
you know every now and again it would
just come back to life again
like in the haram being in the haram
and just seeing the different zoar like
the different tourists those who come
from
hajj subhanallah i actually began to
realize
how powerful youtube is i don't think i
realized that till
after i actually got to medina because
medina is like a central point for
muslims to come right
and people watch you online and the
repercussions i didn't see how bad it
was that actually got there
with certain things not just necessarily
my issue but
other things that happen and and
whatever have you right
so of course from allah azzawajal you
know videos going out and getting views
and
reaching different parts of the world so
every now and again i would
see people from around the world coming
up to me stopping me
many of them really just appreciating
but some people they would
just point this issue out so it's like
allah azza
was keeping this issue fresh in my mind
and to not just sleep on it
and um so two years in
it kind of like just went like that once
the two-year
mark went by i started taking this issue
much
much more seriously like brothers are
bringing their arguments
about that specific incident i'm not
speaking about
that dr haddad having gone to
shia for the purpose of uniting with
them
okay and was that the case was that not
the case
and everybody brings me the arguments
you have those who are pro and those who
are against it right
and um i really just started taking this
issue much more seriously
i think about it for a moment i don't
think any of us
want to have um
you know the oppression on our backs
something very powerful that um
send me all of knowledge it's a big
it's a big question right
responded back and he said
knowledge is too vast
but in terms of
and you're not carrying the burden of
having taken lives
okay khameer salvation
and your stomach is void from the wealth
of the people
and you've managed to refrain your
tongue from the
you know the uh the honor of people
right lazy
and you're sticking to the jamaa the
congregation of the muslims
then do so he could have told talk to
him about anything
look what he's actually advising him
about okay
and that's not a lie man it really
really isn't a light matter
and so you're studying at the same time
you know the evidence is about
volume about oppression having said
something that you shouldn't have said
because just because somebody is wrong
in something
it doesn't justify you now to start
pinning up against him everything else
okay refutations are part of our
religion okay
it's something that the sharia uh
calls to is something that is mentioned
in a hadith there's something that the
messenger
wasn't done the companion has done it
those who came after them they ordered
it
okay and even ibrutinib
he mentions some very very very powerful
statements he says
the coolest innovation their scholars
are more dangerous upon the ummah than
the people of the
noob the people who sin then he then
says
this is the messenger commanded to kill
the khawaris the kharagis that's how
they translate right
or is there any other word that you guys
use
uh he commanded that they are killed but
he said not to kill
the oppressive
is calling the people to innovation
okay
it is a must that his situation is
clarified to the people
okay and then he goes on to say well
removing his harms is more
better more greater okay
then removing the harm of a highway
bandit
okay like for example muhammad let's be
honest here if you see a pedophile
who's going to do something to our kids
right
you're going to want the people from him
right am i wrong saying that
and this is something related to
um the integrity of our loved ones and
whatever have you and likewise if
someone's going to steal something from
you you're going to warn that person
and adeen the religion of allah is far
greater than this
having said that having said that
when rebuking it requires a lot of
hikmah okay
and this is exactly what i'm allowed to
mention it goes
it is to do that which is appropriate
befitting okay
in a manner that is befitting and also
that time has to be befitting us all
and they mention three pillars first
pillar that he mentions
he has to be done with knowledge and
then he also mentions
and then he mentions the three opposites
and i'm going to comment to that
okay it has to be done with knowledge
you can't just basically say something
about someone
that is not true are you connecting this
with um
doctor yeah i'm gonna comment okay i'm
gonna come into that right
it's important that we mention this
because it's a taboo topic
and i believe sometimes there's two
extremes on this matter right
so it has to be done with knowledge then
you have also
which basically means not acting on
emotions
someone's upset you and he's angered you
i mean they usually translate as
forbearance okay forbearance
okay like somebody's angry you don't
rush to kind of like
punishing him and holding him into
account and then and that is
to just think about things like slowly
not to be hasty and rushing into it and
i believe that
i actually was very hasty just listening
to one side and seeing some parts of
some videos cut up
and i take the full blame for them
and we'll you know uh speak more about
it in a bit insha'allah
okay
announcing things right okay and
uh unveiling the secrets and of the
discussions that happen and so on and so
forth
so just rushing into things you're in
need of and
and this is something that messenger
sallallahu alaihi wasallam said that
allah really loves when he was speaking
to
the place right in your
and he mentioned the three opposite
things of that he said ignorance
unthoughtfulness i think that's how they
translate right
and uh hastiness
so going back to what i was saying even
if the guy is a kafir
like you're a few atheists all the time
right and you speak about
the christians and i'm just bringing the
worst example here
if that christian
believes that jesus is the son of god
you are not allowed to say about him
islamically speaking and this is the
fairness that our religion came with
that jose is the son of god
you can't say about the individual what
which has no
reality whatsoever okay
he says
it's not lawful for you to oppress
any individual even if the guy's a cafe
and then he
mentioned the statement of allah
azzawajal
be fair don't let the hate that you have
for people entice you
to being unjust even if the guy is a
shia
shiite right he's cursing
and i know what you call it some of them
might have tokyo whatever have you right
but because he's now cursing morale you
can't just pin against that individual
let alone anyone else who is less in
danger
than the shiites and the christians like
the huani's even if the guy is in the
hawaii
the guy is the sufi diobandi wherever
brelvi sometimes you find that your
bandits are refuting the braves
and the other way around and this group
is refuting that group salafi might be
refuting that
you cannot say about that individual
which he hasn't done
if you're going to rebuke him rebuking
for what he said what he's done
okay and um
so i just feel like um
that issue about the shiite um
was a bit of that kind so let me just
quickly mention exactly of what kind
um it was it wasn't it wasn't it was it
wasn't fair at all
it was it was it was totally unjust so
as i'm coming up to the two years it's
really bothering me now right
why did you before you continue with
that sorry what made you come to that
conclusion now
i mean what was the thing because
so from what i understand so far in the
picture you
didn't endorse it in the today beginning
but then you
kind of looked into it and thought
actually this seems like a cut and paste
job maybe or it's being meshed together
in a way which is not
favorable makes it look uh something
that it's not so um
what exactly about it do you think is
unfair about it
okay i'm gonna come on to that so so now
the last two years
every now and again i think about it i
ask allah azzawajal to help me deal with
this issue
in the best and most correct way right
praying is tahara i've even went to the
kaaba okay
and then one year before that i dropped
a message to dr haytham
on his whatsapp i got the number and i
dropped a message to him
about the issue of tibet
right i never did that just because
a friend of mine okay
if your associates they do something
it's not fair again
for you to be painted with the same
brush i just wanted to claim myself with
him
and i clearly and explicitly said to the
i do not agree
with the stances that you take and the
views that you have and i'm not going to
go into the other things that
we discussed then because it's not right
um i discussed this right now right
um i said i had no i do not agree with
you but i did not say that
okay if abdulrahman's done today on you
i've got nothing to do with that
you see what i'm saying do you know
anyone else other than
in the in the group of the rahman hassan
that
did that pronounce that ruling on him
that called him an innovation uh let's
be more specific maybe calling the
khawani
right so you have to understand that but
is it it's anonymous for them for
like for example and he considers that
deviant sect and so therefore so this is
synonymous
the same thing yeah and i mean like just
so we're clear exactly what we're saying
in it you know
but uh if you call somebody that's
you've declared that individual to be an
innovator if you depend
if you think that yeah
many people say that you know
they're not they're not really a sect in
that sense the islamic
definition of a sect the thing is if
we're going to say ich ma
i would have to know what every single
scholar said no i don't think i've done
it
like i haven't collected every single
scholar because
means that every scholar in that time
he has to agree and take a position of a
certain yeah even even
even more problematic i was reading
sorry to cut you off
this might be a tangent but i was
reading sunnah okay and
uh i was talking about who's included in
ishmael
and what makes it more difficult is that
he actually includes the martezi lander
you know it's gonna be difficult to get
his mouth okay it's not a condition in
order for
a group to be misguided you don't always
what you call an identity for everything
in order for help them to take place
right like nothing but the force we move
them for
not even muslims i'm just speaking about
if we clearly established that
this sect sector's totally misguided do
i really need an ijmat before and hukum
can be made by a scholar
possibly not really okay before it
removes them
now i'm not talking about i'm going to
impose this on you and you have to take
this
i'm not basically saying that you have
to take my view or that yeah that's the
view
if the sheikh says and there's even
maybe even if there's one person with
him or even it is
no one ever to be a delete you know what
really matters is
the evidences that are being brought
forward right but i can't enforce
it upon you to say yeah you have to take
this and if you don't take that
you're an innovator agreed well yeah
yeah yeah this is uh it's unacceptable
yeah
what i was gonna say was that at this
point of going back to it's clear like
let's be honest that they considered him
an innovator someone who's not sunny
he said that in the park yeah about that
one he came in they said that yeah i
don't believe
blah blah blah he made that kind of
articulation so
you're saying you don't have anything to
do with that
there is a difference between declaring
somebody an innovator right
and one having fallen into innovation
that's why he says
yeah and uh and not everybody that falls
into a bidder can you call him a move
teddy
okay that's we need to really just
differentiate between the two
okay i might say okay this person has
these uh bid acts with him these
innovations with him
that doesn't mean that i'm calling him
an innovator tadia is something huge
right okay um uh
this is not a light matter so you're
saying
so for you now you have to understand
like these kind of things are normally
done in a court case yeah
and you get how to account for you know
compensations go out because of what you
say actually about a person
when it comes to taking him out keeping
him in right do you think that
so therefore do you think do you think
that that that was a mistake
well then we have to make that kind of
this no i'm saying this is an issue that
none of us should be speaking about okay
it's an issue that needs to be taken to
the scholars
these are big affairs that doesn't go
back to myself
yourself these students of knowledge who
are in the uk
even in the west this is an issue leave
it to the scholars this is their job
okay you see what i'm saying yeah so um
that's what
that's what should have happened that's
what should have happened and i said it
to both of them as well right
and even if let's be fair just to if
they took it to the scholars
and the school is pronounced
it's not we have to follow that scholar
they they have a right to say that
but that they have a right to do knuckle
of it like we need to say
do you mean by okay he's an innovator
now right
and because he's an innovator all of you
guys have to follow me on this and if
you don't follow me on this then you
you guys have got issues
yeah because sometimes a person it might
not necessarily become clear to him
yeah you see what i'm saying so there's
a lot of like things
attached a lot of strings attached and i
don't think we can go through an hour
just discussing yeah of course
a tab dear and take fear books have been
written on it yeah
the scholars have spoken about it
extensively yeah and uh
it's an academic discussion that you
need to go back to his books like i'm
talking about the viewer not necessarily
yourself
okay yeah yeah yeah so um
but yeah so your your position now is
clear i i feel like you're saying that
that was something that you think was
not the right thing to have done so let
me actually explain now how i actually
came to this point okay um
so there's like one year left now right
till this very moment right
i dropped him a message and i said okay
i don't make tabby
right but he said look i disagree with
dr haysom's positions but what you guys
done yeah
that was oppression wow
i remember he said some he said the eye
to me
and do not do they not think that
they're gonna stand in front of their
laws
that they're going to be resurrected on
your marquis my phone
leo may not have them to a great day the
day when the people are going to be
standing in front of their laws right
at that moment he put shivers down my
back of me
and um and he basically said to me
go check the video there was i wasn't
aware of this video
yeah i i i i i i don't know they put a
video on your video
huh the actual the whole uh
i think it was like a 40 minute yeah
when he was going to debate this yeah
and then they said that he was going to
unite with them
yeah that one so yeah that one is i
think the after that they put it out as
the counter
part two oh is it how did i see yeah
it's like a 40 minute one
they put english subtitles and
everything as well and they put out
if i'm not wrong i don't think i've ever
seen that video before
okay that night i watched it eight times
and i mentioned it with john as all
the sixth or seventh time i burst down
into tears
i broke down into tears and i even went
to the cab after that
um just ask allah so because now
okay i'm in a situation now because i
said something publicly
in the adnan rashid debate which we're
going to comment to in a minute yeah and
i defended that stance
right okay and i also spread it and
there was many times that i justified it
now right
and so many how many people watched that
video
it's it's a good quarter of a million
really both of them yeah emerald's video
and another shit's video as well
yeah that video gave me a lot of
publicity as well so uh
no but but now you're saying that that
was right practically
but he he dis we're going to come into
that promise we're going to come and do
that
okay so um i'm in a position now i have
to clarify this publicly
yeah because even azimuth
mentions that whatever is done privately
you deal with it privately
and whatever is done publicly you have
to you have to you have to deal with it
publicly right as allah mentions
right because i did it publicly now i
have to at least make sure that to the
best of my ability i can get that
message across to all these people
who may have taken out from that video
that what i was saying was correct
if i come to the conclusion of this so
are you saying because you've quoted the
verse
are you are you making are making
repentance publicly on this map yeah of
course
what am i making this video for the
reason i'm making this video is
i have to like clarify this you see what
i'm saying
and um so uh
so yeah so when he said that to me and i
watched that video that very night and
this is in front of the camera right
something has to be done right and uh
and obviously at that time all these
ayats are going through your head
you know your friends yo me affirmative
because at the end
even though they might i'm close to them
okay he's not gonna come and stand in
front of allah
azza will defend my cause you see what
i'm saying as allah mentions
every person is going to come by himself
and the day when the brother is going to
run away from his brother and
mother and so on and so forth right and
and just as i defended my brothers in
the past and they loved for me to defend
them
um it's important that someone else
should get that as all you see what i'm
saying just like as you love to be
defended
i'm sure you'll accept as though that
the defense is against you know
so aki for the last month or like the
last month
because i have a little studio in my
flat and i was like i just i've been
thinking about how can i would you call
it
um really just get this out how can i
deal with it
and uh and then that these two videos
came out
and it's just subhanallah and it just
happened to happen you know
um so yeah so where are we at the moment
so yes
so you're at the point where i was
talking about you watched the video
seven eight times
and you came to a conclusion that you
that was
to be associated with that and to defend
that position yeah
um because like i said you know with
adam rashid yeah that discussion with
him that discussion that
uh i had with adnan rashid i stood by
that position and i even said that this
has caused confusion and everything of
what he was doing
and i've heard some of the arguments as
well that the brothers bring that he
woke up that day
to go and unite with the shia okay this
is what the whole
the whole conversation was about when i
went back to the video
the fact that as soon as they let him
speak
his blasting what's in their books and
everything and
and he keeps on repeating in kunda
nuridu
we're gonna unite
we have to we have to what treat and
cure the
because everything runs on it goes dual
you know countries are built on
and um and i heard some of the arguments
that the brothers mentioned as all that
um okay babe what are they gonna leave
like are they gonna leave just
huh uh cursing the companions and
everything else
um so even if they leave off some of
these points they're still shiites right
they're still shias
so he's gonna unite with them even
though the shia eyes
having left off some of these points
that are quite major
but at the end of the day i i kind of
think that's
how can i put this i mean the quran says
doesn't mention all the things that you
know of course even when you go into a
debate now right when you go into debate
okay get rid of this then we'll have
another discussion you see what i'm
saying yeah
and um at that time mentioned to me that
this is something that shitholi
mentioned right i tried to find it until
now i haven't found it and i'm still
looking
for it um but this is what he quoted to
me at the time
okay so i believe he was it was kind of
like just
really being fair you know he was when
he said that to me it was just
really being fair and uh so yeah when i
was in hyde park
i didn't even go there to debate anymore
that's the first time i've ever been to
hyde park
i live in leicester like i mentioned i
went there to
have lunch with my cousin because he
follows alidawah
yeah because let's go to the park as
well now let's go to hyde park
so i go there
[Music]
me and the funny thing is alidawah was
actually
debating with um with one of these uh
one of these one of these kafir guys who
maybe you know him he's a black african
guy
who's trying to make the religion of
islam look very barbaric
okay and the message in somalia is
really bloodthirsty
to take lives and whatever have you so
ali dawa
is debating him so when i get there um
i'm listening right and i'm just like
really wanting to just you know say
something to this guy so ali dawa goes
you know what i don't know the verse
speak to him
so i'm basically throwing ayat at this
guy versus this guy right
and the guy is basically getting to the
point he can't answer to some of the
ayah the verses you're saying that the
religion is barbaric and
it forces people so i just gave you all
the ayat
it's not happening right while this is
happening
adnan rasheed calls me because i want to
speak to you
and me at that point like i've heard
good things about nanoshit i don't know
him like that john fontaine said some
good things about him that they've
traveled together
and um i the only time that i know i've
done rasheed is
from the debate from the debate that
abdullah hassan when he was debating on
sarasota i was sitting there right
adnan rasheed is messaging me in a very
very respectful way okay
i know that i'm not his sheikh no i know
so but the point is he's being very
respectful yeah that's yeah that's how
he is
yeah so uh that's the only thing that
i've ever known of him
so he's saying make sure you say this
make sure this gets to him
i've never seen him from then so all my
relationship with him is a very
respectful relationship
he does he does that with with people
yeah and that's a very respectful way to
speak to someone even
yeah of course i've never told him
anything like he's older than me and
everything right so the point in all of
this is
you're speaking in a very respectful way
that's all i've ever known of you
you call me to the park like and i can
see him he's very
very angry very upset
and uh i don't understand why he's upset
why he's screwing
until we actually start the discussion
be honest i don't watch the whole
discussion
so i thought i watched bits of it like
highlights and stuff
but the gist of it from what i
understand is that basically
like you said you were you were
defending that position and he was not
he was saying
he was upset he was he was he was angry
and yeah
yeah no he wasn't even he was basically
saying uh
we we went from one topic to another
topic and no
no topics it wasn't like a healthy way
of having a discussion
okay that's why that's why even clearing
the video i keep saying okay let's go
sit there
let's go outside see the guys angry and
i miss a lot and what did he say
if you're standing up and you're angry
go and sit down if you're sitting down
and go lie down right
so um and okay i wasn't trying to
disrespect him
i wasn't being horrible towards him i
can see why he's upset
because how about this how about that
we'll put all of that behind us yeah
seriously muhammad i i i don't
mean rasheed until that debate which was
i think maybe like two weeks before
or maybe like three weeks before our
discussion in hyde park right i wouldn't
even call it even
never huh it was just i wasn't that
wasn't that was an argument
it was just an argument and and um
yeah and you know like what i would put
to you now on this on this issue around
the russians
it seems like you and him are on the
same page in a sense that you don't you
both believe in the same
things and like you're agreeing that
you know that [__] that video shouldn't
be put out which i think was the main
point though let me make this very
crystally clear right i'm speaking about
that point
yeah of doctor hathan yeah yeah
um i think he was basically just trying
too hard
yeah yeah and what what said about him
like there's other things that if you
wanted to refume that you could refute
him on
but at that point i believe he was wrong
and you'd have to get someone on his
level to be fair yeah
that's yeah yeah otherwise it would just
i mean from an end user perspective
people would just
like i mean i'm happy somewhere i want
to see i want to hear i personally want
to hear
a second opinion on the student loan
issue or no no
no no the student loan yeah or the
voting issue whatever
whatever it is that positions
controversial yeah but it's got to be
someone
you know because even if say for example
let's let's let's say that people have
the knowledge
and they're younger than him yeah let's
just agree it's just not going to be
taken seriously from the end user
so if someone's on his level right and
comes out and
his age and his experience or whatever
and has the
tools that he has and provides an
academic
refutational response i'll listen to it
you know what i mean
but don't you think that's a problem
with the listener himself like in the
sense where
and of course this is what academia does
to the people right phd phd
masters masters bacclaurius i'm not even
mentioning like i'm not talking about as
qualifications i'm just i'm thinking
more about
um in the years in industry
like how long have you studied for do
you know what i mean if you're a person
i'm not
trying to take a digger anyway i'm not
obviously talking about you in
particular but
if you're a person that has barely uh
grappled with the arabic language
and doesn't know how to string a
sentence or don't know how to speak
in the arabic language and has a member
of the quran
and yeah and so on and so they don't
have animal they don't have it
or they have it on a very superficial
level and then you go out and attack
that or something
yeah or he's got much more controversial
opinions or
hamsa youssef who's got some
controversial opinions especially
you're not gonna be um accepted
and the reason why is just because the
guy's age the guy's credentials the guys
uh he's been in the game longer than you
have and it's just
it's not like for like if that makes
sense it's not like for like
so um that's what we especially on
matters where
you need you need more than more than
superficial knowledge
i i think that's my just my view on it i
might be wrong
but i think a lot of people from from
the feedback i've been getting is
they would kind of look in that
direction you know i mean someone who's
a bit older someone is
and is not personally or emotionally
invested in the issue but look
let's focus on the positives here i
think that there's the positives in this
situation is that
that people are coming towards the same
kind of understanding look
when it comes to subjective fear let's
have a more nuanced approach
otherwise i believe it's going to be
chaos there will be chaos there it's
going to just
the issue is just you're going to find a
bunch of individuals
here yeah just coming out and speaking
about these very big issues okay
i can just leave it for whatever
scholarship just let them do their thing
yeah that kind of responsibility
yeah yeah and alhamdulillah he hasn't
because if he has then we would be in
big trouble if we get things wrong
yeah you know and so that's one thing so
now you would say that
yeah i don't think i've had anything in
my heart towards him i just think the
way
you think about him shake his head yeah
yeah absolutely
he's a monster in his field the thing is
i just haven't even like
i don't personally watch videos that's
just me
the other one that i get sent i might
click on it but i'm just so
kind of like on this point i don't know
what she is
one of the top debaters in the muslim
world right now yeah
and he's got he's got stuff that you
would benefit from i'm sure he you've
got stuff he'd been
from and that's one of the biggest
tragedies in these things
both of you are working on different
lines of knowledge like you know
many people have been listening to you
now i'm thinking allah has memorized
many
you know aquael hadith you know
beautiful that's
that's that's something we're missing
because we don't necessarily focus on
these issues
but someone like on the other hand if
you want to hear about early christian
history if you want to hear about
indian history if you want to hear about
you know comparative religion if you
want to hear about you know all these
things
i mean and that's these are really like
important things i've heard he's got a
masters in
history oh yeah he's got a masters in
history degree a
master green history and it's not just
that he's been in the field for very
long he's got big collections
okay so i feel like that connection
between you and him
i'm just giving you an example
it would produce a lot more benefit for
thomas
like the fact that now you're not seeing
face to face in this
let me make this clear yeah not face to
face i actually dropped him
a number of messages if i'm not mistaken
on whatsapp i can't remember exactly
what it was
right but um i have nothing against him
i really don't
good i did try to come to a solution yes
with both parties yeah
okay about taking down the videos
because we've had this discussion before
right
that it doesn't look good it really
doesn't look good and
it didn't look like it was going to
materialize so i if anything
i try to arbitrate between both parties
to take some of these videos down
and um yeah beautiful i think you could
be
but uh but i can't remember the
exactness of it i really can't remember
the exactness of it
he's going to love you after this huh
no no i'll say good things about
everyone like you know i had rahman
hasan before you in this podcast right
so and
everyone who's look at the comments on
that video and people loved his
his his stuff likewise tower man you
know he's trying to stay
i'm trying to keep everyone happy you
know likewise you know a lot of his
videos before because he wasn't he was
in the tower
before i was and i saw some of his
videos you know some you know he's in
the street talking to the people and
you know in aid and all of these things
let us all be very fair here of what
imran is doing it's very very for the
youth today
i don't know anybody who's doing that
i'm telling you okay i've had brothers
i learned from his uh videos here you
know before i came in i saw some of his
videos
videos and masha allah some nice
techniques here some nice videos and the
way he talked to the youth and whatever
we all learn from each other i've had
brothers
who are on target this is when the penny
dropped to me
a brother on tag he's sitting on the
front row in my borough
class yes and he comes up to and he goes
is that
i need to leave it's like why because
i'm on tag i have to be honest
you see what i'm saying he's getting
through to people so he he's he's
getting like
a lot of these brothers into the masjid
some are becoming pull up they're going
out
seeking knowledge abroad and everything
yeah
it's very impressive it's fantastic if
like you know
if everyone just focuses on what they're
really like
for if you're a manager of a football
team and someone's a really great
striker i remember you used this example
in saudi arabia
yeah i thought it was someone's a really
good striker
i mean someone says okay you're a great
striker come here and be
a defender do you know what i mean it's
gonna
it's the comparative balance is the team
yeah yeah the competitive advantage is
lost in a sense right
so we know what amron is good at we know
what number she is good at
we know what you're good at we know what
i'm good at we know what everyone has
advantages at everyone knows why i'm
good at magic
so so you know if we're all working like
you know
that then it works beautifully it works
in a fantastic way and no one's trying
to take away from anyone else right
no one's and you know like like
i'm gonna maybe look into this right
right now i know he has a youtube
channel and everything
yes i've kind of haven't followed him on
what he knows
i don't know much about it like i can't
you know say anything bad about him yes
with regards to that like the only uh
one that i've kind of like really just
spoken about to was john fontaine
yes when we did the podcast and uh
you know what john fontaine is good at
right yeah
let's not leave anyone else yeah and he
said some good things about him i can't
speak bad about a person if i don't know
him no no i've been trying to see what
i'm saying i know him
yeah so i don't know much about him
right yeah yeah
when speaking about others it has to be
of justice and knowledge not with
ignorance
and unfairness and injustice right right
as this is the situation
he says that the people of innovation
speak like that exactly man exactly
so now let's move on to another
controversy which i've been involved in
unfortunately and put my hand in and
created my own sense of controversy is
um you also
had nothing to do as far as i know with
the the leaking
or of the emails and you want to make
that clear as well don't you
again first uh like i said earlier i'm
putting making that video or you didn't
endorse that did you
look again i was not consulted
beforehand
right as i mentioned before as well i'll
say explicitly now right
i only knew about a video just maybe
like a day or two before it was going
out that a video was coming up
i only ended up seeing the video after
it was released just like everybody else
right and i watched the video twice okay
and at the time things are happening
very very quickly very quickly right
and uh with regards to leaking of the
emails yes okay i
had i didn't even know that was
happening so another question i have
here is
did you have anything to do with leaking
emails or publicizing the lead material
okay like like i said before um i was
not consulted beforehand
i didn't even know what the content of
that video was
till it was actually released once it
was released
i saw it and uh i watched the video
okay uh thinking back on it now
was it a smart thing to do because i
heard imran's explanation now when he
was doing that video with sergey lip
was it a smart thing to do okay was it a
wise thing to do
because we know that a lot of doubt
uh has now hit the people's hearts right
and the general principle with regards
to um
spreading doubts and telling your
friends about it is
what suffered allah mentioned right
then let him not relate it to those who
sit around him
okay and let him not hit
the majority of the scholars of the self
and when we use the word salaf okay uh
what we're intending by the three golden
generations not people who are breathing
here today
the word has been tarnished the moment
you will use the word seller people
begin to think that it's referring to a
group of people okay
um we're speaking about the sahaba the
tabi in the table
i know the prophet saws
the best of his my generation those who
came out those who came after them right
so he says the majority of the salaf are
upon this tadeer
because the hearts are what weak and
that the
the doubt it really snatches a person it
can make you go haywire
because of that dao it could you see
what i'm saying
so now releasing emails and i've heard
what
imran's justification is i'm really just
still trying to
it's muslim it says
again like like i said here do you agree
with this kind of
though oh and do you think that the the
ones who came to this conclusion
what i can say is this is one of my
regrets right this is one of the regrets
that i have
sometimes men being involved in very
controversial issues
and things related to public safety and
public fear
uh
that i may have just like saw advice
from the elderly
okay you have to understand when this
video was going even if
i did have something to say about this
video being released
we're all in our twenties at that time i
think was like 27
imran really yeah mid-twenties
um myself are on the same age so
we're all in our 20s the poet he says
and you're going to like this line of
poetry
if there is an issue that only
youngsters are
pushing through or that they are
carrying
okay uh you're going to find a
deficiency in
that uh issue that they took onto
themselves right
so this issue now of making this video
that has some very great repercussions
right
which could put the people's hearts into
doubt
and again i'm not saying that his
justification is wrong or
the uh person which they had abdul
rahman made with regards to releasing
this video
i'm not even going into that at the
moment just thinking about it now
the least we can all agree on that
many scholars should have been you know
consulted
by leaking some of these emails where he
explicitly states that
having doubts about the preservation of
the quran or whatever have you
okay and maybe some of the elders maybe
and maybe a lot of that stuff
yeah i mean from michael with subsequent
conversations
uh i'm not gonna say they can have
context but i'm a more nuanced than that
and
and this is why it's very important
because it can be taken out of context
as well
it's more important that for someone and
this is very like you mentioned you
alluded to it is like hell magenta
um and this is the right so this is the
nas
and so even for me i was thinking uh i
you know i had discussion with you about
this before if this is the justification
you have muslim or let's say even in
this case
versus the
and so on that you have to keep private
information private
if you think that the muslim is is is
is there but then you have an us so
which which goes before i think i think
the discussion that he was bringing was
revolving around
him
now spreading some of this information
is email is something that is bad
right okay and the problem is
yeah later on bring this out subtly
to the people in his lectures again it's
something that is problematic
so he was coming from the angle of the
lesser retrieval the issue is we don't
know what he's going to come up with
and and still it could be in development
yeah i i fully understand
i fully understand but then they use as
a justification what he did with
juju yeah about the whole zombie thing
again it's not something as you just
mentioned now it's not qatari that he's
going to do this
it's not even that it's not that your
understanding of what he thinks is what
it was what the understanding is
you could definitely say that you could
definitely say that but as you mentioned
there is no source which speak about
what you call it
preserving the the the secrets of the
people even that narration i mentioned
earlier
what does it mean like secrets being
revealed to the people right
one thing that really touched me is this
narration i'm going to mention in a
moment but before that the messiah
says
if somebody you know tells you something
and then he begins to look
you get indications that this is a
secret yeah of course this isn't a man
it's a trust but look at this narration
right
he said um
and he sent me to go and do something
and i ended up becoming late my mom was
waiting for me and i was late right
so when i came home he she asked him
why was you late he said
he was in some
what did he ask you to do ana malek
responded back and he said
this is a secret look at her response
and allah i think every single one of us
can take really just
um inspiration and a lesson from this
right
now comes in a negative context in
arabic language indicates
generality what do we do as muslims
someone told us something the first
people that we tell is what the wives
my wife is not with an s but
we tell the wife okay here it's i said
nobody
we might tell our close ones every
friend has a friend right and
um every friend has a friend
and you know what tends to happen say
well you're not gonna tell anyone
and he goes to someone else say well
he's not gonna tell anyone and he goes
to someone else
i can before you know where that secret
is turned into chinese whispers while
the name of allah is being used in vain
so this is the assal okay this is the
assad with regards to discussions that
happen in privately
in private but that particular issue as
to whether this is something that is
justified because the lesser of the two
evils
on this scale thinking about it in
hindsight
which involves the religion of people to
be doubted
because at that time i was told that a
series of refutations or clarifications
are going to be made with regards to
the leaking of the emails which i didn't
which
didn't happen but now um
when you did that video with uh startup
i don't know whether he clarified
everything or he's planning to clarify i
still haven't watched it i mean the
thing is like i said
before i'm i've i've spoken to you
myself
and and the stuff is that he is
constantly reviewing
and reading and changing and
you know what i mean so that's why i
think this is very important
if something is to be refuted publicly
it has to be said publicly
and and that's why it's very dangerous
for someone
to to challenge that which is private
privately uh publicly and vice versa
but i think we agree on this point yeah
and i think at the end of the day again
it goes back to that same point i
mentioned earlier
that sometimes it's best to take
sensitive issues back to the elders
scholars exactly every scholar has
somebody that he goes back to
okay so do you think there was too much
kind of issue had been done
by the group members yeah maybe so okay
something very powerful that i want to
mention with regards to what even hasn't
mentioned
right and i really just wish that in the
past that i acted upon it
he said
how beautiful is silence in very
sensitive issues
how often have we seen people who are
destroyed because of what they say with
their tongues
but we've never seen anybody who who's
destroyed himself because he was silent
so these issues i just kind of sometimes
wish that
um i may not have what you call it
partake or partook
in any of them and um even now
subhanallah this video that i was making
i consulted a lot of the elders uh
there's a number of them they they don't
agree like they're not with they clearly
explicitly like
osama uh stevenson who runs medina
college i think you've met him before
right
and other brothers as well but i thought
their permission to maybe mention their
names and they said
just leave out like even they clearly
stated that they don't have anything to
do with the dawah of
dr haytham they don't agree with his
views and the stances that he's taken
while at the same time they said to me
that was oppression man
that thing that was said about dr
haytham and the way he was made to look
out
it wasn't it wasn't you know with
himself really wasn't with fairness
you know so um even though they've got
nothing to do they don't have
cooperation with dr haitham and they're
still saying
this particular thing and this goes back
to what i mentioned earlier
if you're a real sunni a person who's
following the truth and
upon the guidance of the seraph if
you're going to refuse somebody has to
be with ill
and he
justice is that you weigh your opponents
huh with the same bold that you weigh
yourself with
meaning you treat the people the same
way you like to be treated
i mean there is even more isn't it
even if it is against yourselves and
your parents and um
well you know what something that really
touched me was um
the way ebeneutemia was with his enemies
his student he mentioned his madaja
salikin right
some of his own friends mentioned i wish
i could treat my friends
the same way that ibrutimya can treat
his enemies
or the same way entertainment treats his
enemies and his opponents
right i mean i thought we had a
different approach to me remember that
me
yeah why i i i i i read something in
this
um you're saying
i wish you being tamiya was a little bit
more uh
yeah yeah yeah a little bit more calm
with his enemies or something like that
yeah
i don't want to rescue him yeah but even
subhan look at this other incident right
and we're just defending him in the team
you're here um
i came to give him the good news that
one of his greatest
enemies had just passed away look what
his response was
he told me off he showed his unhappiness
to
me giving him this good news and he said
look what he did he ran to his house
and he said to his family today
i'm going to take the same place that
your father had
anything that you guys need from me that
today is like
yeah man what is that with us
so this guy let's get straight he goes
i'm going to take his place anything you
guys um
see that can be taken another way i
guess
treat your enemies a bit you know yes
yes treat them a bit nicely
so a question i want to personally ask
you know because you've brought that up
and we had to be fair right
um do you think it was a good idea to
bring
dr yasser like with a lot of these
doubts that are surrounding him and some
of these issues that he's having
okay and ask him some of these questions
i think so because
because now the christians are partying
what i've seen in my own eyes
they're commenting on different videos
i've been sent screenshots do you think
it was a good idea i think to be honest
the idea for me to ask him those very
specific questions
were was a bad idea and because i'll
tell you why it's a bad idea not because
there should be any reason why
christians missionaries or
evangelists should be it's a bad idea
because we were talking about complex
issues
and this suffer had no idea what we
were even trying to communicate and they
did distort what he was saying and he
put out a public statement saying i
don't agree with what you're saying it's
very important by the way
he did this to me i don't think i saw it
no no he put it on facebook he said
whatever you're saying i believe the
quran is preserved a hundred percent and
you know well he he refuted that but
me asking him very specific questions
like if i give you a mushaf and
uh would it be exactly what the prophet
now
i know he has a view which is that's not
the case that's
traditional view and it would be a mix
of the like he said on the podcast it
would be a mix of
which really to us is not problematic
view right if it's a if he's
if we extend obviously if he's if you're
saying there's more
things that he's saying that could be
problematic we have to see that publicly
right because it hasn't come with that
publicly yet
but that what he said in the podcast
yeah
was not anything near kufr what he said
in the
in the podcast was nothing free or or
it was just something which was you know
how he was being
he was being charitable right and
because he
like he like he said the thing he's got
this kind of academic hat that he puts
on right
so he put the academic hat on and he's
speaking charitably right and speaking
honestly
and that honesty and that charitable
speech
which is actually i've been looking at
these messiah illinois
it's been misconstrued by them and has
been taken out of context by them and
they see as a reason to celebrate like
you said
which is totally bartender false and so
i think from that angle asking them
those very technical specific questions
was totally for me the wrong thing to do
especially knowing that there could be a
potential he could answer in that
controversial way because he started to
cut you but
remember when i mentioned earlier um
what suffered he says
whoever he is in innovation i think you
know these doubts and these
the way he's kind of putting it for me
right i don't hear anything for me do
you see what i'm saying so
i was asking him and obviously what he
came with was something
which the the articulation was
misconstrued by these people because he
was speaking charitably speaking in an
academic way i mean and and i think he
needs to kind of think about
the way he puts things across 100 that's
something he'll look at i'm
100 sure we'll all look at the thing is
my
my platform that we're speaking from now
everything has to be watertight because
who is going to be the first person
that's watching i know people are
watching it now that are going to be
non-muslims not only that by enemies of
islam
now he's if you're speaking in the
university right which is used to do it
as a professor you're not going to speak
in the same way in a political
water type way where you're going to
speak in a little bit more relaxed way
you're going to have a more
more nuanced approach
let's say for this because these people
are ready to take anything out of your
so i get this point yeah and i think
he's everyone's learning from this but
i remember for me i have to take
responsibility for my own my what my own
actions are
i shouldn't have asked the doctor
i should have asked him a question
specifically about
something very technical to a lay
audience which i know he has
opinions which which i'm not going to
say are controversial
i'm going to say are anti-normative in
many aspects or some things which are
not
completely in line with the traditional
view you see what i mean
so i should not ask him that question
especially before he hasn't even
published anything about it
the the classical view let's call it the
view of the quran let's say
so so that's it uh and and um
the fact that you're i think that's
jason i think that that i really regret
that actually yeah
asking him because not only regret on
the on on on the front that
um i asked him that question he answered
in the way that he did yeah which was
charitable and all that
but also because of the the the way in
which
it's been manipulated and distorted
the consequences of it i personally feel
like
that could have been avoided if i had
not asked that question and i'll take
responsibility for that hmm
yeah yeah so on these
like i i always tell brothers this right
and i'm the first person to advise
myself
something like mentioned right so
indeed just speaking in a very general
way sometimes
what does it cause without clarification
what does it cause it causes
the minds of the people to become very
messed up yeah
and also i mean some people can take
what you say
and distort it but once again of course
you can't just always shut up every type
of
enemy that comes at you but the most you
can do is just kind of like
but what i want the muslims to realize
about this right
is that causing this is very important
attacking yes on this point
is not a good idea okay attacking him
is is a fitna attacking his view that he
hasn't even publicized is a fitna
because it will make them reaffirm
their narratives or he's talking about
preservation not once that he mentioned
present by the way the word preservation
i don't think once he mentioned he was
talking about that's what he was talking
about
so and they they've marketed it as
preservation of quran which is different
and what i want the muslims to realize
is that okay if he comes out with a bath
with a research which is against the
quran whatever there will be majel there
will be a space
for refutation of that bath in an
academic way
if there's something that people
disagree with but attacking
only affirms the distorted narratives of
the
these christians and yeah and the quran
says
you know this is very important when
harun came back uh samus came back
and harun was there
[Music]
do not make me uh do not make the enemy
open for me right in a sense
because you think about it the way he's
looked at in the west
the way he's looked at in the west the
guy with the academics the guy who's
seen as the
one of the leading figures in the west
right if you make him look like
that he has got doubts about the quran
yeah why would you okay
yeah is going to just come down like
is strongly connected to right in many
different parts of the world right
right if tomorrow and may allah is
saving from this
starts having doubts somehow imagine the
repercussion he would have
yeah i'm not saying he's on the same
level or even he has that kind of impact
that he has in the west but imagine that
repercussion that will happen
exactly yeah you see what i'm saying so
i think that we have to be very careful
with these missiles
and i think that people from all sides
the quran is something which unifies
jamie sorry
right here and they take the ayah i'm
talking about the fork of islam
not the ones
this is the quran that we are much more
ali we have
ishmael so this if we if we're talking
about something which everybody
all of the people ashari athari um
all of them all of these have agreed
upon what the quran is
from the beginning to the end of the
book so
now these individuals want to make this
very important they want to make it seem
as if there's
a quran what is the quran we can't allow
them
because for a thousand foundries there's
no khilafana we know what the
yeah we know what the we know what the
we don't know exactly what a specific
notion
but we know what the the idea is
variation yeah
we know all of these things and so to
for them to to to
to come in and and speak in that manner
we cannot allow that
uh and then using one of the dua to
whatever we say
yes his status in the west
especially on academic level is is very
high
so so in terms of influence whatever
your view on quality is or
or yes whatever your view on him is
he's still listed in if you like the 500
most influential muslims in the world
he's still got he's done what he's done
so it doesn't make sense to have a harsh
approach with him and to count a
cancelling approach to him and
it doesn't work like this we have to
have a nuanced approach and wait for the
publications
and and then deal with accordingly i
think this is what we need to do
would you agree with this yeah of course
yeah so if he basically came out like
i'm just asking you this right if he
came out and
some of the things had you know uh
problematic things inside of it
yeah um you wouldn't have a problem just
coming out just literally
i would have i would have a problem
refuting what that is that he's saying
you know what i'm saying i'm not me
personally do a knuckle of those who
have said like if i if i disagree with
dr i'll tell him directly i'll say
listen this this doesn't make sense what
you're saying oh this doesn't make sense
what you're saying
i have no problem with that another
question i want to ask you is about
this kind of cancer culture people
cancelling people out because of
association guilty by association
so they do a tab dia maybe from their
own volition without the consultation of
the scholar
and then they'll say whoever's
associated with this person who's
themselves as an innovator and this just
causes division like unnecessary
division
and it's untenable in the ummah having
said this now
what is your stance on this if for
example i would if you were to see
uh if i were to see you could i see you
in in a mosque which is potentially like
a diobandy mosque
or even uh brelvi mosque or something
do you see an issue with
um doing higher doing good in places
spaces which are not especially or
specifically selfie spaces
or do you think that there's a more
sophisticated approach to this i think
this question can be
maybe uh answered in two parts right the
first part is
um going to the masajid
of those individuals who might not
supposedly be upon the sunnah right
i wrote an article in 2015
okay and i gave you the worst title
possible
the permissibility of going to the
message of the
the people of innovation right because
what was happening at the time was
there was this group of people who were
blasting individuals who are trying to
quote the sunnah simply because he went
to this masjid
and that message isn't necessarily even
seen as
a messy that propagates innovation they
might just have tendencies because of
culture and where they came back where
they came from back home right
so the moment a brother goes there pdfs
are being put together
putting his picture and then someone
else's picture a previous speaker came
there
and then this message what they've done
or whatever have you
it was kind of becoming a bit of a
pandemic right okay
the moment a brother goes through that
message he's being labeled straight away
and um i put this article together like
as a as a defense for some of our
brothers who were being ripped apart
even scholars were being ripped apart
because of this particular issue
he went to this message that that means
that he's associated with them he's with
them
this article that uh also my brother
said
we put it together and we translated
some of the
aqua of the scholars and in this
pdf we had the likes of uh
saying that's even permissible to go
into a church and give the hour there
and you also had uh uh
right yeah who went to the tijani and he
gave dawa in their masjid and
whatever have you who was there yeah
yeah so you have him doing that you have
i remember i also
saw affect
he had a similar effect with this and so
many other scholars i try to keep it as
neutral as possible by bringing
you know the statements of the scholars
right uh from both sides
yeah you had even
if you just think about it for a moment
northern yemen was all shiites
right he was by himself he was like his
80 right
who left to saudi arabia studying
university took a masters from there
and and he came back to give da'wah
subhan allah
like we can actually say that
uh jamaica islamia the university of
medina
they have a big father over the people
of yemen because they taught him
he came back he took on the methodology
of the
sunnah right and he started giving
da'wah and that whole province is shiite
subhanallah i even had stories from some
of my masha's saying that
shaykh mobile used to be in the masjid
and he would say oh you believe
and there would only be one person there
and then
one time that individual came up to the
sheikh and he said to him
why do you keep saying because this is
what plural right
i'm only one person maybe the angels are
there
because i'm only by myself so the sheikh
would go
out to their marketplaces he would be
giving dawa to them
so much so that what happened many
people started becoming sunnis
and the congregation started increasing
but the share would be going out to them
even my own shaykh abdul hamid he used
to specifically this is like
maybe in the last 20 years he used to go
out to the masajid of the shia and he
would speak about the virtues of alibaba
he's got nothing to do with shiaism
right he would grab the mic and as soon
as he grabs the mic you can see the
congregation getting worked out they
want to do something to him
he will say the reminder inshallah will
be after the sunnah prayer
on the virtues of every time they would
cool down a bit i heard this in my own
ears
and he would then start speaking about
the virtues
whoever
so he's propagating the sunnah while at
the same time he's using ali namit
to speak about the issue they are
involved in you see what i'm saying
so so much hair came out of it they they
even said if this is a
sunnah then anytime come you know
so um like ahi this is i don't want to
say unanimous agreement from the
scholars
um but there is so many statements so
many statements
from the scholars saying so the idea
that we can even put the
article under the video right yeah i
wrote this you're saying
you're saying that you're talking about
um
people being associated with people of
different
understandings him going there giving a
lecture
propagating whatever he needs to
propagate and i'm not talking about
compromising
you know sometimes what happens the
person comes and he's compromising the
innovation he might even go as far as
like acting like it's perfectly fine so
it's like talent
okay when
uh and i always mention this right that
cooperation can be in a
way where sometimes the government
they need everybody to come over from
different groups
they've got issues related to the
massage they need signatures
okay this is now a form of cooperation
of course
you're not compromising you're not
compromising your religion you're going
because
that person you're not mixing exactly
right
that person who works in the government
he looks at all of you guys and you guys
are the same he don't care
huh and um all you guys are coming
together
you guys need to attend that meeting you
need to sign
whatever paper you guys need to sign and
you have to show a united front
on that issue so that's one form of
tower
and there is nothing wrong with that
because there is a bigger
facet at stake here of course imagine
all the massages if you don't come to
this meaning all the messiah gonna be
closed down
or there's issues related to hijab or
whatever have you
and what's being taught in the schools
to our youngsters you're gonna attend
right i've attended that in the past as
well yeah but then you have
cooperation on a dower level is this
possible muhammad
let's be fair here right i'm calling to
talk i'm calling to the sunnah
and you've got a guy next to me sitting
on the same panel he's calling to bid
and he's calling to it's okay for you
not to call on to the messenger
when you visit his grave when you go to
medina
these are two opposites that um they
just don't come together right
and this kind of cooperation of course
is battle this is now
look next thing with i'll tell you a
story okay
of my own self um when i was doing
some postgraduate research in uh
so as university okay and there was one
lecturer that i had who was who was
lecturing you yeah he's appear he's a
phd holder and
i'm not going to mention his name well
he's basically
in my opinion as in dick okay i know
that's a very harsh statement to make
but he's basically
any no explain to people he's a heretic
yeah yeah it's something that takes you
out of the face
of islam okay so he was spouting that on
a daily basis okay
and he was just disguising him in
islamic jogging and stuff like that
was he like a non-muslim or was he like
a muslim he was a muslim name
he claimed to islam he has an appearance
okay now remember the cluster we were in
was can was a mix of muslims and
non-muslims
so there's this is a dao thing right in
a sense because when he's now making
that all the muslims agree upon okay
it's upon us the people in the class who
were a mix they were selfies in the
class there were dear band in their
class and they were braves in the class
yeah all three were in that class it's
upon us
to show united front so that the
non-muslims can see this is something
outside of anything that any muslim has
ever said does that make sense
so clearly um in that situation it's a
kind of town
it was mutual it wasn't even something
which we all came together and said
let's sign a document of town or
something like that but it was just that
yeah i agree with what he's saying here
yeah i agree with
and this is a kind of town okay in a
sense and
what i'm trying to say is that it's
always contextual that the person who is
brotherhood might believe in this
yeah he might believe in this it's just
like a sultan and many of the big
scholars did right and they had to
will for us
and no one's kicking them but when you
say muhammad is not always what you call
it
many of the big scholars of islam
because no one's taking the sukky of
the fault of islam he's written big
uh usually attracts and so on well i'm
saying well i'm not trying to say that
let's
let's mix that right yeah but what i'm
saying is that that's yak there
it was mutually understood by almost
everybody in that class
just just unfortunately
that we need to back each other on these
because this huju mat
are bigger than this it's actually
bigger because
you're putting it into the quran and to
complete this repeat you put in the
the prophet was being in question all of
these things
this is it's a battle between a man and
kufr like in the clearest and
non wheelie sense the people the
brothers and uh
and sisters because they are muslims
that they argue for is from the
background or for whatever polemically
they do so within the paradigm and this
is very important
i'm not saying it's justified well we
agree of course
but what i'm saying is that they still
cling to hadith and they still work
there
they still took quran sunnah you get it
they still they have the paradigm
these people yeah the same right in a
sense
you could argue that before i think
people might not understand that word
you know maybe a reference
so so we take our religion from the
sexual references all the same
whereas the progressives and this also
progressive muslims as a whole
like i can even mention them by name and
naimy i think his name is
um amino dude and these individuals
they've left the paradigm
okay and this is in these spaces and
this is a space that i think many people
endow i'm not
not aware of the academic space this is
the battle the battle is between the
progressives and the traditionalists
and they put traditionalists all in one
box like for us the salafis and the
braves and the abandons they don't care
about that
because they're tackling the core of
religion because the thing is what they
want to change
they want to change our morals do you
see the point and
by and large that the brelvin and the
obama and the salafi all three of them
have this very similar um
practices they'll pray five times a day
they'll wear their cab there
make sure you're a bit specific because
you could talk not talking about i'm not
talking about stephan here but i'm
talking about
visible practices like a salazar
yeah i've got hajj and so on yeah and
even haram take this masala away of
of uh which this clear disagreement no
one's going to
no one's going to lie about that any
things that are basically above the
surface that yeah
like for example exactly yeah yeah so
visible practices
so for them i mean do you think that
yani this progressive muslims or those
who put them in their place who the
i would call them the colonial masters
they don't they don't care
if you believe in this to be honest
they all they want to do is they change
now i'm not suggesting this is not an
important topic
okay i really am not suggesting i want
to make this very clear i'm not
suggesting that there should not be
those debates and those
uh refutations because we're talking
about islam
yeah yeah yeah someone believes so
this is something which we're not
compromising one at all yeah very clear
yeah
however we need to know which yani where
to where where to position the
the gun in the sense that in in in the
different cases and in situations you
find yourself in so
in this in this case i'm talking about
my specific experience here in
in the universities like when they when
you're
questioning the existence of prophet
muhammad the existence or
they even existed the the quran is
there and this is a combination of this
and now we have to
sorry but that is actually that's more
of an issue we have to tackle this
first because the kafir who's listening
to or the muslims listening to it
is going to think well why do i need to
join this religion in the first place
they won't even get into the discussion
phase two of okay
what's the hadith say about them
and so on you know what i mean they
don't care about that and they don't
know about that because their master
is completely different so we have to
bring them into the fold first then have
the discussions
so that's why i feel like when we when
we say dawah we have to be specific
because
it's there are forms of dawah where even
like you just said like for example
or um sex education in the schools do
you think they'll say salafi
let's come in uh something that is uh
attacking the united front it does
require united front and so long as
someone
someone who is claiming to be a muslim
they can they can work together
other muslims on it even shia and sunni
even sunni
there's some issues that that the it is
for both
halal me for example right in a school
you work in the school for example
this guy i'm not going to cooperate with
him because he's a shiite and that would
be
foolish especially if you're a majority
population and you're sunni
so you're not going to join the effort
of the shiite for example who wants to
promote halal and me
so all of this town right and what i'm
trying to say but i think we we
we have common grounds in what we're
discussing yes that ta'awein is of
different
cooperating yeah and cooperation is of
different levels
right okay so i think one thing we need
to be very careful here is
uh a way which uh some of this
cooperation can be done
without acquiring the beliefs you know
becoming mixed with one another right
and then
falsehood and also that which is correct
becoming mixed with one another
okay and also there being a level of
distinction right
because so you're saying there's a
difference between unity in a sense
and uniformity in the sense that we're
not coming all together and saying okay
we want to
we want to basically unite we want to
put akai to the south side yeah
see what i'm saying that has to be used
there has to be of course that's what it
means how can i be calling to the son of
the messiah
i'm telling the people the messenger
said to abdullah ibn abbas
when you ask ask allah and then the guy
next to me it's like a conference we're
going to talk about
akida i'm coming yeah
yeah but of course there has to be a
level of yeah we have to come together
right this is happening now in the
schools related to sex education what
the
kids are being taught and the kophara
saying okay bring your issues forward
this and now right and then
people from different walks of life they
all have to come together right and
they're disgusted
you see what i'm saying yeah and um
yeah of course so what do you think of
this
this whole like you were calling it kind
of this um
phenomena of um
okay that's the second scenario or the
second part of the question right
uh of guilty by association right okay
and what tends to be thrown around
is that statement that is used by the
salaf
whoever's bidder is hidden from us then
his companionship is not hidden do you
know who said this
i can't remember now from the top of my
mind but what i can say to you is
that a lot of these statements from
books like
right uh i actually have somebody who
preceded me in saying what i'm going to
say right now
came to birmingham and
he was asked this question about
teaching the books like
because in this book you're going to
find some very unrestricted statements
that can be
totally taken out of context if this is
now being taught to a revert
which we've seen happening right and
you've got same as like if you see
somebody with an innovator
then associate with him every type of
evil
okay do not sit with the people of
innovation
indeed what this is gonna cause is gonna
cause sickness to your heart whatever
have you
okay yes there are right statements they
are statements that
were mentioned by the self we don't deny
them but what we need to basically agree
with is who's an innovator
when you paint a picture to the people
like we are the safe sect right
and you have this kind of syndrome of i
have a green card i'm going to al-jannah
which we can maybe even touch on in a
moment
uh okay and a person begins to think
halas
i'm so it and he begins to forget about
allah doing righteous actions
just because you've called yourself a
selfie or you've adopted that type of
way of thinking that doesn't give you a
green
card to enter into agenda okay and these
statements to be clear they're not
judging the religion they're not
exactly even we were discussing earlier
when we were discussing
uh this issue that is discussing
right is the same of the sahabi in
within yourself
it's weak honey for those who actually
say we don't
this issue that is discussed in books
like rhodoton nader and
other books of the sulfur it's not
discussion
by the way um no i mean
the whole of for
so his his cold is not huge in that
sense here something very interested in
team you mentioned i think it's
important that i mention this here
and he's going to brought perspective on
his book right look what
uh humilitamia mentioned right and
hypnotamia
don't put him in the same bracket as any
other scholar who came after him
and i'm talking about those who are
breathing here today
okay um ibn as imam and habibi said
about him
he has in-depth understanding when it
comes to knowing the positions
of the companions and also the targeting
they have been saying this right
many of the answers that imam rahim
allah gave
and those that are like him with regards
to these issues that we're speaking
about right
it came as an answer while
the questioner when he was asked in this
question the one being asked the
question like for example
muhammad he already knew who was talking
about for example
in layman's terms right so the viewer
understands like when i was in eleanor
in damage
everybody was on the same page there
everybody was
selfie everybody was upon you know that
way of thinking right
it's like a whole village imagine like a
whole village nobody has a different
uh creed of view than yourself
so you have a teacher that's sitting on
the chair everybody's attending the
class you sometimes used to have like
five thousand six thousand people
attending one class after asset and then
after marketing saying because all the
um the uh the the
the the kaki and the shops have to close
down at the time of the lesson
so he's asked a question okay
and what has he been asked about an
innovator now that has walked into the
everybody knows that this person is a
innovator the shaykh is being asked a
very general question
what do you say about an individual who
sits with
the innovator everybody knows what the
shaykh
is speaking about or what the question
is speaking about
so a lot of these answers that are found
in books like
it was the result of an answer being
given
after a question like this was asked so
one wants to now read this book
it's translated to him even the person
who might be teaching he doesn't know
arabic himself
so he's now translating it
communicating this to all of these
attendees some of them are reversed they
walk out of the masjid
on the streets of the uk oh you're an
innovator i can't sit with you
he was giving him salams before when in
fact that person he's just like a
general person he stays away from it
his own family members he stays away
from him mom and dad mom and dad
husband told these stories when he came
to
uh when he came to luton how a wife
boycotted a husband
because of some of these internal selfie
type issues
or that which is ascribed back to you
see what i'm saying
which is of course it's insane it's
absolutely insane
and i believe this kind of way has
really tarnished
the tao of silvia in general okay
we know when we say salafi it means
quran sunnah upon the understanding
of the early generations collectively
not ahad
right because the messenger says
the best of these who came out and those
who came after them
so to look at salafia today okay
and basically paint it with one brush
because you've run
into a certain group of brothers well i
again it's totally unjust
am i wrong for saying that right you've
run into a bunch of brothers
who were rough and tough and all you
ever heard from them was
them ripping into the people okay even
ripping into their own brothers who
might be calling to the same thing
just because they're not calling to
allah under your banner you've started
having a go at them
you know it's like ibra josie is sitting
with us right now right and seeing
what's happening around
us in the uk he mentioned something very
powerful he said
hadith
upon the people of hadith
is them insulting and criticizing one
another
and what are they trying to do here
they're trying to
uh what's the best way to put this
they rejoice over the downfall of others
and this is all under the banner he says
yeah and they do this under the banner
of
and we hear about this all the time
right this is a science that is studied
in
hadith where uh the scholars of the past
like imam bukhari
they would criticize the narrators in
order to protect the sharia
so the same thing with the uh yeah so he
says
what the scholars of the past they use
this field that they use in order to
protect the sharia
you see what i'm saying so he's like i
heard something
actually he was saying that people that
do this that these are two separate
fields that you shouldn't
you shouldn't impose
a field yeah for that again warning the
people
from innovation again is something that
the religion caused right
but you go to certain gatherings
it's as if they have their own exactly
it has all the names in there 50 guys
are here being thrown onto the floor
they're being you know thrown under the
rug this person's offered this person's
offer this person's office and this is
okay again let me
cancel straight let me let me make this
very clear
warning is bidder and it's people i
mentioned all the courses
is part of our religion yes you do it
with the atheist you do it with others
as well
we do it as what is part of our religion
right but
he has to be done in a fair way it has
to be it has to be done by the right
people not someone else
arabic language and doesn't know how to
communicate or read or
right when he when he said they they do
it under the banner
of al-jar i didn't ask myself the
question is you're looking at what's
happening in the uk
see what i'm saying he's passed away how
many hundred years ago
but too many of these brothers maybe
even jealousy be of the manager huh
i mean
one thing that um
he opened my eyes up to is the books of
umitamia
because when i first came back from
damage i was given a very hard time
very hard time so much so
and in fact i can actually relate to
what yasser is saying at the beginning
of your podcast when
he talks about some of the difficulties
and issues that he went through right
i can fully relate to that i've seen it
medina maybe this is something we're
going to discuss
the amount of trouble i've been given in
the last four years just being in medina
so when i left after spending time in in
aliyaman and i came back
i was given a very hard time so much so
that i began to think is this what dean
of allah azzawajal is
when i ran into some of these brothers
the way they were treating me
and this was being used under the banner
of as salivir
this is the way of the self as salafi is
this
is a noble thing it's not what i think
or what you think muhammad or what my
sheikh thinks or your
it is the way of the three golden
generations
you see what i'm saying they're
understanding collectively
until actually they met the likes of
shahrukh bhusam
and also abraham's naveed and later on i
ended up meeting
and the common feature amongst us all is
that we were oppressed by the same group
of people
and we were made to look that
this what we're doing is against the way
of the self even if you
repent or retract yes it's not all of
that stuff you're not good enough
what happened was the man hasn't said to
me
open your eyes up to the books of him
so one thing he said to me was he was in
the house of one of these mashach
i mentioned just maybe i shouldn't
yeah huh you don't have to yeah just
let's just leave inshallah it's one of
the prominent
of them right and he said to him sheikh
look
i have these statements of humanitamia
like where am i going wrong ibn
is saying this about boycotting
the exact wording that he uses right
that it depends you can't just boycott
everybody
and all the other statements that he
collected
has gone against the unanimous agreement
and i i found that shocking i struggled
to really believe that
i later on had discussions with some of
our mashaykh in damage
i've went to shariat okay one of the
things that i get criticized for being
with shariah
i spent four years in yemen right and i
took to him i was like
i don't need to discuss now on camera
what exactly i discussed this is
a timid a student going up to
saying what about this and what about
this what about that how do we deal with
these issues of pictures and whatnot
that
and these you know and then
yeah i i just never after i left and i
started opening my eyes up to him
[Music]
i just i just like this doesn't make
sense
this is not a productive way of dealing
with problems of the people
and of course it's more safer to take
the position of the scholars of the past
the one who's living he's not free from
any fitness so we have the classical
scholars all saying this
it's like they're living amongst us
today they've dealt with our problems
with how to deal with these issues right
and i think that's more than sufficient
yeah how what would you say now probably
as a final statement to
about all of the things obviously you're
one of the people
who you're very close to although very
close to
and you're very close to some of these
brothers um
uh and i think they respect and love you
and i think you feel the same way
yeah with them as well yeah and uh more
so i still work with
knowledge colleges of course i just
literally finished now what kind of
uh what collectively you've come to the
conclude first of all individually you
came to the conclusion that you know the
the kind of stunts you took with that
shiite incident with
uh it was an oppressive one and the tip
of the hour was not a good
idea and but maybe we should calm down a
bit with tempting out what
would you think that um would sway
the other brothers to come to a similar
conclusion to you
okay like i mentioned aziz
sometimes you gotta put your emotions to
the side past incidents to the side
and just think about your let me mention
this narration
of course he was the hadith of the
muslims right a man came up to him yes
he came to complain about somebody
oppressed him you know
he said to him
himself when he's free but you come to
him when he becomes busy with the
affairs of the muslims
he took a whip
it's like you know one thing that you
lash people with right
the man ended up leaving the place while
he was upset
you know the type of individual he was
who would always you know hold himself
to account he's the one that said
hold yourself to account before that day
comes your health to account
he contemplated upon what he done and he
asked
somebody to bring that man again when he
was brought
he gave him the whip goes with me
and the man said no
i've left my right with allah
and i've left it with you um i said no
choose one of the two
because okay no worries i'm going to
leave with allah
and then the man left omar was so upset
was so down he walked into his house
prayed to raqqa't and then he just burst
into tears
and he said these very beautiful
statements about himself he said
he was very low and allah
a man came to you in order to seek your
assistance right
instead of helping him you end up
oppressing him
what are you going to say to your lord
when you come to him tomorrow
yeah so i think
we as muslims forget about the dua just
as muslims
we need to have this constant habit of
before we go to sleep
we just think about everything that we
said okay we forget what we said
tomorrow what we said yesterday
like this constant habit of before i go
to sleep i just think about i take a
moment or two out close my eyes
everything that we that i said right
that which i said about so and so that
which i said about
this individual because he's all gonna
uh come you know something also that i
read in sierra leone
al-asma i mentioned is that also sophia
and authority and tooth
he wrote in his will that his books are
to be buried
omin he regretted some of the things
that he said about
others inside of this book he wrote
what he said about this person what he
said about that person but
look at his humility he was
um down to earth and humble enough to
just admit a mistake
okay i remember what you call it john
asked me this question
do you believe that you have changed
when you went to medina
i don't necessarily think i could call
it change it's just maybe more so
when you sit around the scholars
and you see the way they
just how can i put this in a very nice
way where
they just really just lighten down
something that is very
huge upon the next the soul of a person
for example now
retracting is not an easy thing right
this thing that i'm doing i've been
thinking about it for so long
for the last four years it was brought
to my attention i've been thinking about
even more so in the last two years
and even more so in the last month
yeah it's not an easy thing these
brothers are very beloved to you and
sometimes to say
something that might be a negative light
it can be very difficult
and i really really really hope that
whatever mentioned doesn't happen to us
when he said
when the people they start cooperating
in sin and evil they will begin to hate
one another
okay and like when you see some of these
like let me give you guys an example of
a medina
the six books of hadith in like 28 years
if i'm not mistaken but don't quote me
on the years
and he's then when started teaching the
books again
he's maybe in his early 90s or late 80s
you can just quickly do a google check
and you'll find this right
how many times have i heard him say this
the hectic
he is like the scholar of the scholars
in the haram
how many times have i heard him say
allah
and i don't even study with him the only
time i've studied with him was
like i finished the book with him
this was recently when he taught it
before he started teaching the
malik how do i know this sometimes when
i leave my halakhah i just basically
stand there
and i'm listening to the q and a's he
says
and sometimes he would even give a fatwa
and he retracted later on
like one of the towers that he recently
gave regards to the coronavirus
about you know how you pray in the haram
they praying well there's a distance
between each masali
huh he gave the fat when he said this is
no that you can't do this
and then later on when the legend spoke
about it he retracted his statement
somebody was very dear to my heart right
and i'm just giving you guys a couple of
examples of some of these mountains
today who are teaching in the most
honorable place in the world obviously
you have the cabin you have the medina
as all
huh there was a class
where he was teaching us uh just after
maghrib
he was quoting the verses and he was
trying to make a point about toheidan
he mentioned that right then he
mentioned the other ayah that's just on
the next page
when allah said
that's basically the ayah right
when he mentioned the ayah i've never
had the ayah before
he mentioned it in a way that is not in
the quran
it was very unintentional it happens to
us sometimes we might misquote an ayah
right
i'm sitting in the class i'm actually
like suspecting myself did you remember
did you even remember
i'm asking myself
next lesson after obviously saying
because yesterday i made a mistake i was
trying to quote an eye but i completely
misquoted it
when you think about it is this actually
really difficult for them i don't
believe it's difficult for them
when you come to realization that those
who are far greater than you
from the look look at the look
was not like any other companion i'm
going to conclude with this right
he was the top when it comes to the
hadith he memorized even have
doesn't ring a bell to most people but
you say
everybody knows him the sunnis know him
the shiites know him as all
and they've got their observations on
this great wonderful companion right
even harry one of them companions that
didn't memorize
anywhere near what they did he came up
to him and he said to him
oh you made a mistake used to give
the fats with that if the adana fajr
goes off
right and you're in the state of janaba
whether it was because of relations or
whether you were
you had the wet dream you can't fast
that day and he gave the sweater for a
very long time
until abdu's came
both of them saying that
what you're saying is incorrect they're
basically saying the opposite
look at his response he didn't turn
around and say
like i am i am i've memorized x amount
of a hadith
did they really say this
if that is the case they are more
knowledgeable than me forgot this issue
and he retracted his statement even
faith suggests and recently retracted
some things that he mentioned with
regards to this whole corona virus
so um it's important you know we
just kind of like accept it we swallow
the ego
and we bite our tongues and just you
know
and and what you did basically in the
video is always it's very highly
respectable
you know and uh
when you basically said that you said he
was mistaken
it takes a man to do that right i've
done that i've
i've had so many retractions brother you
know
that's yeah that's because it's like and
and the other thing is and i think it's
important that we discuss this is
by the way it disarms people as well
like when you
when you've made a mistake and it's
clear for the majority to see at least
yeah
and it's a mistake you know i've made
many of them
as you as people know like uh i've made
videos about my mistakes
muhammad hijab exposed i made a couple
of videos okay i've never watched them
so but i was going to say is that yeah
it's just to sums people because
you want your record to be clean as
possible and you know you're going to be
making mistakes especially at a young
age you know you're going to be making
mistakes so
what's the what's the fuss about you can
just get out of the way and
kind of move on yeah it's it's something
that universally happens with everybody
you you seek more knowledge even if you
tell me he said
the more you increase knowledge you
become more merciful right that's
beautiful
yeah and um you really tend to think
about things more and
and and there's no harm you make
mistakes even
says to me all the time that he made you
know he used to say things like
telling everybody that you have to all
make hijra jiben
as soon as they came back and all of
them they were on it
but then you kind of like the more you
give the hour you kind of mature
through it and yeah and when you when
you see some of your elders saying this
is yeah see what i'm saying yeah and
things also very very important that we
touch on this is
just because i take a view it's not fair
that my brother who i may have been
seen with yeah okay is painted with the
same brush
and vice versa and vice versa uh and
obviously this is exactly what's
happened now i never meet him there
and now i've been seeing and i totally
understand why person would think that
and uh and even now just right after
this video people gonna be what
yeah me and you don't agree with
everything so any uh okay just
and this is how i've always been with uh
my brother imran abdulrahman likewise
and even yourself when we met up in hajj
i'm not your teacher we've had
discussions right have i ever have you
ever felt like i'm enforcing my view
and if i don't if you don't take my view
ahead i'm gonna declare to be an
innovator or anything like that i've
always seen i've seen that
we sat for how many years what two
hedges we jumped into and we sat down
and we talked and
we exchanged what you call it advices
and you told me some things that i did
and
i took it with a pinch of salt and i
thought about it and it was one of the
things that
we discussed as well right and i told
you stuff is all
and uh even with imran like
i'm not his teacher okay even with some
of the brothers that i teach
i don't think i'm the type of person who
enforces his views
i have this rough and tough what you
call it mentality if you don't take my
view
i'm gonna throw you off or i'm gonna
boycott you or whatever have you right
it's been done to me before somebody
said to me bro if you don't leave this
i'm gonna boycott you
okay go do whatever you wanna he like i
never started doing that
with you and at the end of the day you
know it's uh
it's been said to me so i know how he
feels and i've seen people's
relationships like a teacher student
relation get a bit frosty as all because
of the pushy roughy type of
way that one was trying to get maybe his
message across and i seen it doesn't go
down nicely
so my position with everybody is bro
this is my view
if you want to take is entirely up to
you okay
and um and i'll just advise a person
and because i've advised him now does
that mean i'm going to boycott i'm going
to stop work doing that with him
yeah and some people want that you see
what i'm saying
just because you've differed with so and
so they want you to differ okay i've
differed with him halas boycotting i
don't think that's a productive way to
kind of like
really go forward as well some people
have like ultra motives as well and
everything yeah and i think
that that attitude is um especially i'm
going to say especially in in the
muslim community those who attribute
themselves to salafia if they if
everyone attributed themselves salafiyah
had this kind of attitude you know well
i think we'd have
more productive uh and more
you know effective tower uh as as a
muslim community as a whole
and so i wanted to thank you for coming
on to this podcast i think it's been
extremely productive and um again let me
just point out before this gets
misconstrued as all right
there is issues that go back to a
person's hd head
yeah okay and there's some issues here
that is
credo type matters right and we're not
discussing this at the moment we're
speaking about
other personalities he had the issues
yeah uh
a person like wants to maybe do
something i might disagree with him of
how he goes to do
a particular thing just because i don't
agree with him that's why i'm gonna
boycott him or throw him off you see
what i'm saying
and a lot of the time you see that it
goes back to these issues
now you find people calling this an
individual innovator or
this and that tends to come back to
these kind of things isn't it
and i think you're a living example of
someone who starts off
with um with a certain kind of approach
and then
what the more reading the more knowledge
the more nuanced the more
sophisticated you become for sharing
your thoughts i think
many of the things you've said people
would resonate with and find really
productive soldiers
and uh for those watching insha allah
you can uh
we're going to try and put the these
podcasts on uh
one of the streams like itunes or
something like that we'll see how it
goes it's the fourth podcast
hijab podcast um maybe comment on who
you would like to see
on on a future podcast we're trying to
bring
people from different backgrounds
different specialities different
experiences so just let us know
inshallah